Vanilla Options
Suggest Edits
Earn a potentially high payout with Vanilla Options if your predictions are right within a timed contract based on market conditions.


Vanilla options allow you to predict an upward (bullish) or downward (bearish) direction of the underlying asset by purchasing a "Call" or a "Put".

If you select "Call", you'll earn a Payout if the Final price is above the Strike price at Expiry. Otherwise, you won't receive a payout.
If you select "Put", you'll earn a Payout if the Final price is below the Strike price at Expiry. Otherwise, you won't receive a payout.

Your Payout is equal to the Payout per point multiplied by the difference between the Final price and the Strike price. You will only earn a profit if your Payout is higher than your initial stake.

You may sell the contract up until 60 seconds before Expiry. If you do, we'll pay you the Contract value.

Trading Flow
Authorize using your token: Call authorize API using your token. Ensure that the token has the trading scope enabled.
Fetch Available Instruments: Use the active_symbols API to retrieve a list of all trading instruments offered on Deriv.
Get Contract Details: Using the contracts_for API, obtain a list of contracts available for a specific instrument.
Request a Price: Use the proposal API to get a quote. This will return an ID for the proposed trade.
For the vanilla options, use the following:
Set contract_type:
For Vanilla Call, use:"VANILLALONGCALL"
For Vanilla Put, use: "VANILLALONGPUT"
Strike price: The strike price can have the following values: "+2.20", "+1.10", "+0.00", "-1.10", "-2.00". Eg: To define the strike price set barrier: "+0.00"
Buy the Contract: Execute the trade by using the buy API with the ID from the proposal response. This action returns a unique contract_id.
Monitor the Contract Status: Check the contract’s progress or outcome using the proposal_open_contract API with the contract_id.
Close the Contract Early (if Needed): If you want to exit before the contract’s expiration, use the sell API with the contract_id.
