Multipliers
Suggest Edits
Multiply your potential profit by up to 2,000x if the market moves in your favour. Losses are limited only to your initial capital.


Choose a multiplier (up to 2,000x) and predict if the market price will go up(bullish)or down (bearish) compared to the entry price. Your potential payout grows as the market price moves in your predicted direction, boosted by the multiplier. Losses are limited to the initial amount you put into the contract.

If you select "Up", your total profit/loss will be the percentage increase in the underlying asset price, times the multiplier and stake, minus commissions.
If you select "Down", your total profit/loss will be the percentage decrease in the underlying asset price, times the multiplier and stake, minus commissions.

Your contract will be closed when the Stop out level is reached.

Additional features are available to manage your positions: Take profit, Stop loss and Deal cancellation allow you to adjust your level of risk aversion.

You can close your trade anytime.

Trading Flow
Authorize using your token: Call authorize API using your token. Ensure that the token has the trading scope enabled.
Fetch Available Instruments: Use the active_symbols API to retrieve a list of all trading instruments offered on Deriv.
Get Contract Details: Using the contracts_for API, obtain a list of contracts available for a specific instrument.
Request a Price: Use the proposal API to get a quote. This will return an ID for the proposed trade.
For the multiplier, use the following:
Set contract_type:
Up:"MULTUP"
Down: "MULTDOWN"
Take profit: If you select this feature, your trade will be closed automatically when the value of the contract reaches a specific profit.
Eg: Set limit_order as:
limit_order : { take_profit: 150 }

Stop loss: When your loss reaches or exceeds this amount, your trade will be closed automatically.
Eg: Set limit_order as:
limit_order : { take_profit: 150, stop_loss:130 }

Deal cancellation: When this is active, you can cancel your trade within the chosen time frame. Your stake will be returned without loss. Possible values 5 minutes(5m), 10 minutes(10m), 15 minutes(15m), 30 minutes(30m), 60 minutes(60m). Eg: Set cancellation: 60m
Buy the Contract: Execute the trade by using the buy API with the ID from the proposal response. This action returns a unique contract_id.
Monitor the Contract Status: Check the contract’s progress or outcome using the proposal_open_contract API with the contract_id.
Close the Contract Early (if Needed): If you want to exit before the contract’s expiration, use the sell API with the contract_id.